Add support for Index & Range (#1369)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/ranges.md

# 24 Extended Indexing and Slicing

> > <span style="color:red">**Review Note:** This new chapter, currently (§24), is placed here temporarily to avoid text changes due to renumbering occurring in chapters & clauses otherwise unaffected by the PR. It’s final placement is not yet determined, however between the  Arrays ([§17](arrays.md#17-arrays)) and Interfaces ([§18](interfaces.md#18-interfaces)) chapters might be suitable – other placements can be suggested during review. It can be relocated later with just a simple edit to `clauses.json`.</span>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> <span style="color:red">**Review Note:** This new chapter, currently (§24), is placed here temporarily to avoid text changes due to renumbering occurring in chapters & clauses otherwise unaffected by the PR. Its final placement is not yet determined, however between the Arrays ([§17](arrays.md#17-arrays)) and Interfaces ([§18](interfaces.md#18-interfaces)) chapters might be suitable – other placements can be suggested during review. It can be relocated later with just a simple edit to `clauses.json`.</span>
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit

## 24.1 General

This chapter introduces a model for *extended indexable* and *sliceable* *collection* types built on:

> - The types introduced in this chapter, `System.Index` (§24.2) and `System.Range` (§24.3);

Reviewer: Should these list items all start with lower-case letters? (Ditto later lists.)

Author: @jskeet – Let’s defer to @RexJaeschke on this one. This particular list is a collection of definitions each of which (in next commit as I got a couple wrong) a sentence, so ends in a full-stop. Some have sub-bullets prefixed by a colon and semi-colon (first-level) or comma (second-level) separated, these sub-bullets therefore start with lowercase. So there is a sort of logic to it…

Reviewer 2: Our rule is to begin a numbered or unnumbered list item with an uppercase letter. Exceptions are:

1. If the first word is fenced as bold, italic, or bold-italic.
2. If the first word is fenced as a code fragment.
3. Items in the list of terms in the "Terms and definitions" clause all begin with lowercase letters, as that is their usual spelling.

I do see, however, that we have violations of that approach in a number of existing clauses.

- The pre-defined unary `^` (§hat-operator) and binary `..` (§range-operator) operators; and
- The *element_access* expression.

Under the model a type is classified as:

- a *collection* if it represents a group of *element*s
- an *extended indexable* collection if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Index` which returns and/or sets a single element of the type, either by value or by reference; and

> - an *extended sliceable* if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Range` which returns a *slice* of the elements of the type by value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- an *extended sliceable* collection if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Range` which returns a *slice* of the elements of the type by value.
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit

> - an *extended sliceable* if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Range` which returns a *slice* of the elements of the type by value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an *extended sliceable* collection if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Range` which returns a *slice* of the elements of the type by value.
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit

> > *Note*: The model does not require that a slice, unlike an element, of the type can be set, but a type may support it as an extension of the model. *end note*

Reviewer: The model doesn't *require* that an element can be set either - an immutable list would still be an extended indexable collection, right?

Is this trying to say that a collection which only had a "set" indexer accepting a Range wouldn't be deemed "extended sliceable"?

Author: @jskeet – I knew I shouldn’t add that note… yet I did anyway.

OK, for indexable yes an immutable list counts, on line 16 that is the reason for the “and/or”, the indexer can have a getter and/or setter.

However note the both indexable and extended indexable are based on the use of an indexer, but for sliceable and extended sliceable the former is based on a method and the latter on an indexer. That method is a “getter”, the base model does not support setting a range. The extended model uses an indexer and so can get and set a range (whatever that means in terms of the target type); this aspect isn’t really clear in the source documents.

Now you’re thinking about getters and setters take a look at the revised description of indexer access (which is only peripherally related to Index & Range, but it nagged me having turned it up so I included it) and compare it to the current one – once you’ve untangled the word-salad (how did we ever let that pass, looks like it was written by me ;-)) what is missing? It picks the best indexer at binding time but does not check there is the needed getter, setter, or ref getter. The revised text includes that check at binding time.

Do the semantics for properties clearly indicate there is a binding time check for the required getter or setter?

And as we're talking about getters and setters what about ref getters which effectively both get and set? The new text for Index & Range is careful to mention them, but there is certainly text elsewhere which states that to set you need a setter without mention of a ref getter – e.g. §12.21.2 unless a ref getter is classified as a variable somewhere and it’s just not mentioned here…

(BTW: using a well known compiler don’t try to dynamically bind using a ref getter… I assume its a “feature”)

Knew I shouldn't have written that Note, it might be the tip of an iceberg ;-) or ;-( ?

Reviewer: I'm feeling too sluggish to follow that distinction at the moment. Let's talk about it - hopefully briefly! - in the meeting.

Reviewer 3: How do you feel about omitting the contrast with setting elements for the sake of the flow of the wording?
```suggestion
> *Note*: The model does not require that a slice of the type can be set, but a type may support it as an extension of the model. *end note*
```

Reviewer: Yup, Nigel will apply this suggestion.

The model is supported for single-dimensional arrays (§12.8.12.2) and strings (§string-access).

The model can be supported by any class, struct or interface type which provides appropriate indexers (§15.9) which implement the model semantics.

Implicit support for the model is provided for types which do not directly support it but which provide a certain *pattern* of members (§24.4). This support is pattern-based, rather than semantic-based, as the semantics of the type members upon which it is based are *assumed* – the language does not enforce, or check, the semantics of these type members.

> ### 24.1.1 Definitions

Reviewer 2: It looks odd to have only one subclause, 24.1.1, under 24.1. I suggest we either

1. push the content of 24.1.1 up to the end of 24.1, or
2. make 24.1.1 24.2 instead.

Author: Yeah, I felt there needed to be a heading, and as they only occur as subclauses I made it one.

If it is agreed a change is required then of Rex’s two suggestions I would go for the first, just drop the “heading” so it becomes part of §24.1. The second option would see the chapter start with three headings (§24, §24.1, §24.1.1) which seems a bit much to me.

Author: Based on the ISO clause/subclause model the one subclause is wrong.so Rex's one of Rex's suggestions is required. Suggestion 1 is in the next commit.

For the purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:

- A ***collection*** is a type which represents a group of ***element***s

> - A  ***countable*** collection is one which provides a ***countable property*** an `int` valued instance property whose value is the number of elements currently in the group. This property must be named either `Length` or `Count`, the former is chosen if both exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A ***countable*** collection is one which provides a ***countable property*** an `int` valued instance property whose value is the number of elements currently in the group. This property must be named either `Length` or `Count`, the former is chosen if both exist.
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit

> - A  ***countable*** collection is one which provides a ***countable property*** an `int` valued instance property whose value is the number of elements currently in the group. This property must be named either `Length` or `Count`, the former is chosen if both exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A  ***countable collection*** is one which provides a ***countable property*** an `int` valued instance property whose value is the number of elements currently in the group. This property must be named either `Length` or `Count`, the former is chosen if both exist.
```

Author: @RexJaeschke – Not sure I agree with this one but am happy to defer and I was a little inconsistent as well. I changed others to match:

- ***countable*** collection ⇒ ***countable collection***
- ***indexable*** type ⇒ ***indexable type***
- ***past-end*** index ⇒ ***past-end index***
- ***sliceable*** collection ⇒ ***sliceable collection***

Let me know if any of those shouldn't have been changed.

Note that in the text both *countable* and *sliceable* are used without *collection* as the former requires the latter by definition.

> - A ***sequence*** or ***indexable*** type is a collection:

Reviewer: Do we need to include "sequence" here? I tend to think of `IEnumerable<T>` as a sequence, without the ability to do anything other than iterate over it. If we're primarily interested in indexing, can we just use "indexable type"?

Author: I’ll leave this one for discussion. IIRC *sequence* came up in the source material and/or the PR of terms? I can see that in this clause where there are indexers and a type `Index` using sequence does reduces the number of index-based terms causing confusion, but that doesn’t mean we have to use it. These definitions are prefixed “For the purposes of this clause the following terms are defined” for this sort of reason, and leaves open a possible revision of terms later.

  - which is countable;
  - where every element can be accessed using an *element_access* expression with a single required `int` argument, the ***from-start index***, additional optional arguments are allowed;
  - a sequence is ***modifiable*** if every element can also be set using an *element_access* expression;
  - an element’s from-start index is the number of elements before it in the sequence, for a sequence containing *N* elements:

>     - the first and  last elements have indicies of 0 and *N*-1 respectively, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - the first and last elements have indices of 0 and *N*-1 respectively, and
```

Author: Thanks, fixed in next commit

- A type is also *sliceable* if an *element_access* expression taking a single required `Range` argument, rather a `Slice` method, is supported. Where a distinction is required the type is termed ***extended sliceable***.

Whether a type is classified as countable, indexable, or sliceable is subject to the constraints of member accessibility (§7.5) and therefore dependent on where the type is being used.

> *Example*: A type where the countable property and/or the indexer are `protected` is only a sequence to members of itself and any derived types. *end example*

The required members for a type to qualify as a sequence or sliceable may be inherited.

> *Example*: In the following code
>
> ```CSharp
> public class A
> {
>     public int Length { get { … } }
> }
>
> public class B : A
> {
>     public int this(int index) { … }
> }
>
> public class C : B
> {
>     public int[] Slice(int index, int count) { … }
> }
> ```
>
> The type `A` is countable, `B` is a sequence, and `C` is sliceable and a sequence.
>
> *end example*

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
```

Reviewer 2: Needed when you have consecutive Notes (or Examples).

Author: In the next commit to go with the indenting of the Note.

> *Note*:
> 
> - A type can be sliceable without being indexable due to the lack of an (accessible) indexer.
> - For a type to be sliceable and/or indexable requires the type to be countable.
> - While the elements of a sequence are ordered by *position* within the sequence the elements themselves need not be ordered by their value, or even orderable.
> 
> *end note*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> *Note*:
>
> - A type can be sliceable without being indexable due to the lack of an (accessible) indexer.
> - For a type to be sliceable and/or indexable requires the type to be countable.
> - While the elements of a sequence are ordered by *position* within the sequence the elements themselves need not be ordered by their value, or even orderable.
>
> *end note*
```

Author: IIRC I didn’t indent this one to make it visually distinct from the example it follows.

I’ll indent it in the next commit, unless someone speaks up before then, and if they speak up afterwards it can always be outdented again.

> ## 24.2 The `Index` type

Reviewer 2: We define the syntax and some of the semantics of the hat operator in the Expressions clause, then more and sometimes repeated semantics are provided here with examples. At the very least, we'll need a pointer from one to the other, maybe even in both directions, but I'm wondering if all hat-specific stuff belongs where that operator is defined, and that operator is simply used here without further explanation.

Author: There is obviously a balance required here; the `^` and `..` operators are part of the grammar and need to be covered in Expressions, they are also tied to the `Index` & `Range` types described here. The operator subclauses in Expressions are not example-heavy, many have no examples including `^` & `..`; the examples here cover `Index` & `Range` and use the `^` & `..` – which they xref. The `^` & `..` operators xref the types here.  These are all the uses here of `^` and `..` in *text* (not in code), the lines starting `>` are in examples:

```
10: - The pre-defined unary `^` (§hat-operator) and binary `..` (§range-operator) operators; and
121: There is an implicit conversion from `int` to `Index` which produces from-start indices, and a language-defined unary operator `^` (§hat-operator) from `int` to `Index` which produces from-end indices.
125: > Using implicit conversions and the unary `^` operator the above examples may be written:
175: > The following examples use the implicit conversion from `int` to `Index` (§24.2) and the `^` (§hat-operator) operator to create the `Index` values for each `Range`:
191: The language-defined operator `..` (§range-operator) creates a `Range` value from `Index` values.
195: > Using the `..` the above examples may be written:
209: The operands of `..` are optional, the first defaults to `0`, the second defaults to `^0`.
```

I'll argue that is pretty minimal, looking at it like this (it's Find All output from BBEdit) maybe line 209 could end with a repeat of the xref on line 191?

The `System.Index` type represents an *abstract* index which is either a *from-start index* or a *from-end index*.

```CSharp

>     public readonly struct Index : IEquatable<Index>

Reviewer 2: This type declaration duplicates what is proposed (and needed) in C.3. Let's replace this one with a link to C.3.

Author: My reasoning here: Having these shorter (no doc comments) `Index` and `Range` in their respective clauses helps readability as the types are described, so for example when the readers gets to:

> The method `GetOffset` converts from an abstract `Index` value to a concrete `int` index value for a sequence of the specified `length`.

a quick glance up gives them the type without referencing §C.3. If the type wasn’t there I would have written:

> The method `int GetOffset(int length)` converts from an abstract `Index` value to a concrete `int` index value for a sequence of the specified `length`.

so the reference to `length` made sense.

You need not agree of course!

Reviewer 2: I agree with the convenience claim. However, one of the oldest rules I learned in formal spec writing is to not say the same thing in multiple places, as inevitably they will get out of sync.

Author: @RexJaeschke I agree with the general principle, but sometimes duplication is the better way. We of course solve it for grammar by having a tool scrape it out of the main body and create the annex. Maybe we need a tool which would allow doc comments to be added here, but hidden, and then scrape the types into §C.3 revealing the doc comments…

Reviewer 2: How about we make this pair of declarations informative (inside a Note, for example), so if they ever diverge from those in C.3, the C.3 versions "win"?

Author: At present types and their members can be mentioned in the main text, in §C.2 or §C.3, and §C.5; so the issue of keeping things in-sync is not new, though this PR in describing two whole new types might be seen as having a greater impact.

For now I will leave the types as is in this PR and suggest we incorporate the issue as part of the scheduled discussion on #1135.

    {
        public int Value { get; }
        public bool IsFromEnd { get; }

        public Index(int value, bool fromEnd = false);

        public static implicit operator Index(int value);
        public int GetOffset(int length);
        public bool Equals(Index other);
    }
```

> `Index` values are constructed from an `int`, specifying the positive offset, and a `bool`, indicating whether the offset is from the end (`true`) or start (`false`). If the specified offset is negative an `ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Index` values are constructed from an `int`, specifying the non-negative offset, and a `bool`, indicating whether the offset is from the end (`true`) or start (`false`). If the specified offset is negative an `ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown.
```

Reviewer 2: Zero is allowed here, and the example below uses that value..

Author: Ouch, that's more embarrassing than English typos/grammar :( Fixed in next commit.

> *Example*
>
> ```CSharp
> Index first = new Index(0, false); // first element index
> var last = new Index(1, true);     // last element index
> var past = new Index(0, true);     // past-end index
>
> Index invalid = new Index(-1);     // throws ArgumentOutOfRangeException
> ```
>
> *end example*

> There is an implicit conversion from `int` to `Index` which produces from-start indicies, and a language-defined unary operator `^` (§hat-operator) from `int` to `Index` which produces from-end indicies.

Reviewer 2: We'll need to mention this in the Conversions clause, but can have that point here for the details.

Author: @RexJaeschke – I don’t think so, types can introduce implicit conversions, as `Index` does here, and they are covered under §10.5.4 *User-defined implicit conversions*.

> *Example*
>
> Using implicit conversions and the unary `^` operator the above examples may be written:
>
> ```CSharp
> Index first = 0; // first element index
> var last = ^1;   // last element index
> var past = ^0;   // past-end index
> ```
>
> *end example*

> The method `GetOffset` converts from an abstract `Index` value to a concrete `int` index value for a sequence of the specified `length`.

Reviewer: Possibly put these three into the same paragraph?

Author: @jskeet – In the next commit I’ve put the first *two* in the same para, I think that this method doesn’t sanity check should stand out. Good compromise?

If the `Index` value, `I`, is from-end this method returns the same value as `length - I.Value`, otherwise it returns the same value as `I.Value`.

This method does **not** check that the return value is in the valid range of `0` through `length-1` inclusive.

> *Note:* No checking is specified as the expected use of the result is to index into a sequence with `length` elements, and that indexing operation is expected to perform the appropriate checks. *end note*

`Index` implements `IEquatable<Index>` and values may be compared for equality. However `Index` values are not ordered and no other comparison operations are provided.

> *Note:* `Index` values are unordered as they are abstract indicies, it is in general impossible to determine whether a from-end index comes before or after a from start index without reference to a sequence length. Once converted to concrete indicies, e.g. by `GetOffset`, those concrete indicies are comparable. *end note*

`Index` values may be directly used in the *argument_list* of an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12):

- which is statically bound (§12.3.2) and:

>   - it is an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array (§12.8.12.2);

Reviewer: Possibly remove "it" from each of these list items? (It reads oddly to me, after just "which is". Maybe it's just me though.)

Author: In next commit it will be: 

> - which is statically bound (§12.3.2) and is:
>   - an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array (§12.8.12.2);

etc. Bullets should not all start with the same two words!

  - it is a string access (§string-access); or
  - it is an indexer access and the target type conforms to a sequence pattern for which implicit `Index` support is specified (§24.4.2).
- which is statically or dynamically bound (§12.3.2) and:
  - it is an indexer access and the target type has an indexer with parameters of `Index` type (§12.8.12.3);

> ## 24.3 The `Range` type

Reviewer 2: As I stated above for Index, we define the syntax and some of the semantics of the range operator in the Expressions clause, then more and sometimes repeated semantics are provided here with examples. At the very least, we'll need a pointer from one to the other, maybe even in both directions, but I'm wondering if all range-operator-specific stuff belongs where that operator is defined, and that operator is simply used here without further explanation.

Author: See comment above on `Index`

The `System.Range` type represents the abstract range of `Index`es from a `Start` index up to, but not including, an `End` index.

```CSharp

>     public readonly struct Range : IEquatable<Index>

Reviewer 2: This type declaration duplicates what is proposed (and needed) in C.3. Let's replace this one with a link to C.3.

Author: See comment on `Index`

    {
        public Index Start { get; }
        public Index End { get; }

        public Range(Index start, Index end);

        public (int Offset, int Length) GetOffsetAndLength(int length);
        public bool Equals(Range other);
    }
```

`Range` values are constructed from two `Index` values.

> *Example*
>

> > The following examples use the implicit conversion from `int` to `Index` (introduced above) and the `^` (§hat-operator) operator to create the `Index` values for each `Range`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The following examples use the implicit conversion from `int` to `Index` (§24.2) and the `^` (§hat-operator) operator to create the `Index` values for each `Range`:
```

Author: Well I won’t say I agree with this one and you wouldn’t believe me ;-), but I’m sure it is in the rules – in next commit.

>
> ```CSharp
> var firstQuad = new Range(0, 4);  // the indicies from `0` to `3`
>                                   // int values impicitly convert to `Index`
> var nextQuad = new Range(4, 8);   // the indicies from `4` to `7`
> var wholeSeq = new Range(0, ^0);  // the indicies from `0` to `N-1` where `N` is the
>                                   // length of the sequence wholeSeq is used with
> var dropFirst = new Range(1, ^0); // the indicies from `1` to `N-1`
> var dropLast = new Range(0, ^1);  // the indicies from `0` to `N-2`

> > ```

Reviewer: Can we give an example with a "from-end to from-start" (e.g. `new Range(^1, 5)`) and maybe "from-end to from-end" (e.g. `new Range(^2, ^1)`) just to make it clear those are valid?

Author: Those are valid? ;-)

Added `^1..6` and `^2..^0` down to the `GetOffsetAndLength(6)` examples

> var dropLast = ..^1; // the indicies from `0` to `N-2`
> ```
>
> *end example*

The method `GetOffsetAndLength` converts an abstract `Range` value to a tuple value consisting of a concrete `int` index and a number of elements, applicable to a sequence with `length` elements. If the `Range` value is invalid with respect to sequence with `length` elements this method throws `ArgumentOutOfRangeException`.

> *Example*
>
> Using the variables defined above with `GetOffSetAndLength(6)`:
>
> ```CSharp
> var (ix0, len0) = firstQuad.GetOffsetAndLength(6); // ix0 = 0, len0 = 4
> var (ix1, len1) = nextQuad.GetOffsetAndLength(6);  // throws ArgumentOutOfRangeException
>                                                    // as range crosses sequence end
> var (ix2, len2) = wholeSeq.GetOffsetAndLength(6);  // ix2 = 0, len2 = 6
> var (ix3, len3) = dropFirst.GetOffsetAndLength(6); // ix3 = 1, len3 = 5
> var (ix4, len4) = dropLast.GetOffsetAndLength(6);  // ix4 = 0, len4 = 5
> ```

`Range` implements `IEquatable<Range>` and values may be compared for equality. However `Range` values are not ordered and no other comparison operations are provided.

> > *Note:* `Range` values are unordered both as they are abstract and there is no unique ordering relation. Once converted to a concrete start and length, e.g. by `GetOffsetAndLength`, and ordering relation could be defined. *end note*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> *Note:* `Range` values are unordered both as they are abstract and there is no unique ordering relation. Once converted to a concrete start and length, e.g. by `GetOffsetAndLength`, an ordering relation could be defined. *end note*
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit

`Range` values can be directly used in the *argument_list* of an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12):

> - which is statically bound (§12.3.2) and:

Reviewer: Same objection to the "it" starts

Author: …and fixed the same way in the next commit

  - it is an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array (§12.8.12.2);
  - it is a string access (§string-access); or
  - it is an indexer access (§12.8.12.3) and the target type conforms to a sequence pattern for which implicit `Range` support is specified (§24.4.3).
- which is statically or dynamically bound (§12.3.2) and:
  - it is an indexer access and the target type has an indexer with parameters of `Range` type (§12.8.12.3).

## 24.4 Pattern-based implicit support for `Index` and `Range`

### 24.4.1 General

If a statically bound (§12.3.2, §12.8.12.1) *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible at compile-time to `Index` or `Range`; fails to be identified as:

- an array access (§12.8.12.2),
- a string access (§string-access), or

> - or and indexer access (§12.8.12.3) as `T` provides no suitable accessible indexer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an indexer access (§12.8.12.3) as `T` provides no suitable accessible indexer
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit

then pattern-based implicit support for the expression is provided if `T` conforms to a pattern. If `T` does not conform to the pattern then a compile-time error occurs.

### 24.4.2 Implicit `Index` Support

If in any context a statically bound (§12.3.2, §12.8.12.1) *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible to `Index`; is not valid (§24.4.1) then if in the same context:

- `T` provides accessible members qualifying it as a *sequence* (§24.1.1); and
- the expression `E[0]` is valid

then the expression `E[A]` shall be implicitly supported.

Without otherwise constraining implementations of this Standard the order of evaluation of the expression shall be equivalent to:

1. `E` is evaluated;
2. `A` is evaluated;
3. the countable property of `T` is evaluated, if required by the implementation;

> 4. the get or set accessor of the `int` based indexer of `T` that would be used by `E[0]` in the same context is invoked.

Reviewer: Tiny nit: perhaps there isn't an `int`-based indexer?

- If there's a `long`-based indexer, presumably that would be used.
- If there's a `byte`-(etc)-based indexer, `E[0]` would still be valid due to the implicit conversion from a constant.

I may well have missed something though - let's discuss.

Author: @jskeet – `long` & `byte` will not do, the implicit support is pretty minimal

To be a sequence requires an `int` based indexer

The purpose of the requirement “the expression `E[0]` is valid” is a shortcut way of requiring a setter or getter as dictated by the context.

In the next commit I’ll change the requirements to:

> - `T` provides accessible members qualifying it as a *sequence* (§24.1.1); and
> - the expression `E[0]` is valid and uses the indexer qualifying `T` as a sequence

as your comment highlights that `E[0]` could be valid as there is *also* a `long` or `byte` based indexer.

# 24 Extended Indexing and Slicing

> > **Review Note:** This new clause, currently (§24), is placed here temporarily to avoid text changes due to renumbering occurring in chapters & clauses otherwise unaffected by the PR. Its final placement is not yet determined, however between the  Arrays ([§17](arrays.md#17-arrays)) and Interfaces ([§18](interfaces.md#18-interfaces)) chapters might be suitable – other placements can be suggested during review. It can be relocated later with just a simple edit to `clauses.json`.

Reviewer 4: A note on the tools:  Remove the numbers from these headings. If you want links (outside of the readme, see related comment), Use the `§` and a text marker for now. Such as:

```markdown
# §extended_indexing_and_slicing Extended Indexing and Slicing
```

Then, where you want a link, use `§extended_indexing_and_slicing`.

> > **Review Note:** This new clause, currently (§24), is placed here temporarily to avoid text changes due to renumbering occurring in chapters & clauses otherwise unaffected by the PR. Its final placement is not yet determined, however between the  Arrays ([§17](arrays.md#17-arrays)) and Interfaces ([§18](interfaces.md#18-interfaces)) chapters might be suitable – other placements can be suggested during review. It can be relocated later with just a simple edit to `clauses.json`.

Reviewer 4: After arrays.md might make the most sense. Sadly, it makes me wonder if interfaces should precede arrays, instead of the other way around.

Reviewer: Agreed to make it after arrays for C# 8, but spin up a new issue to *potentially* move interfaces in a later version.

Author: Issue #1399 created.

- A type is also a *sequence* if an *element_access* expression taking a single required `Index` argument, rather than an `int` argument, is supported. Where a distinction is required the type is termed ***extended indexable***.
- A type is also *sliceable* if an *element_access* expression taking a single required `Range` argument, rather a `Slice` method, is supported. Where a distinction is required the type is termed ***extended sliceable***.

Whether a type is classified as countable, indexable, or sliceable is subject to the constraints of member accessibility (§7.5) and therefore dependent on where the type is being used.

> *Example*: A type where the countable property and/or the indexer are `protected` is only a sequence to members of itself and any derived types. *end example*

The required members for a type to qualify as a sequence or sliceable may be inherited.

> *Example*: In the following code
>
> ```csharp
> public class A
> {
>     public int Length { get { … } }
> }
>
> public class B : A
> {
>     public int this(int index) { … }
> }
>
> public class C : B
> {
>     public int[] Slice(int index, int count) { … }
> }
> ```
>

> > The type `A` is countable, `B` is a sequence, and `C` is sliceable and a sequence.

Reviewer: Is A a "countable collection" automatically? I don't think we've defined what "countable" means outside the context of "countable collection" except maybe on line 50. Perhaps we need to say that there's no pattern for recognising a type as a collection per se?

Author: @jskeet – The term was originally “***countable*** collection” which I changed to “***countable collection***” in response to another comment. In both the source material and this PR it is usually just shortened to “countable”, which seems right to me, so the former might be better. I could revert the change, or I could look at defining it along the lines of “a ***countable*** type is one which…” – the latter is probably actually closer to its use in the source, it is just a type with a particular named method (well actually one or two) and there is no *required* semantics other than the type signature. All the source definitions are weak, it's all just pattern based rather than semantic based, I tried to make them a bit stronger but maybe that was not the way to go here? Let’s see what others think.

>
> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Note*:
>
> - A type can be sliceable without being indexable due to the lack of an (accessible) indexer.
> - For a type to be sliceable and/or indexable requires the type to be countable.

> > - While the elements of a sequence are ordered by *position* within the sequence the elements themselves need not be ordered by their value, or even orderable.

Reviewer: Do we want to require or explictly not require that if a collection can be iterated over (IEnumerable etc) that the ordering is consistent with the index here?

Author: @jskeet –I will say not. Near the end of §13.9.5 *The foreach statement* there is a specified order for arrays. I don't know there is a specified order for other types.

> *Example*
>
> ```csharp
> Index first = new Index(0, false); // first element index
> var last = new Index(1, true);     // last element index
> var past = new Index(0, true);     // past-end index
>
> Index invalid = new Index(-1);     // throws ArgumentOutOfRangeException
> ```
>
> *end example*

There is an implicit conversion from `int` to `Index` which produces from-start indices, and a language-defined unary operator `^` (§hat-operator) from `int` to `Index` which produces from-end indices.

> *Example*
>
> Using implicit conversions and the unary `^` operator the above examples may be written:
>
> ```csharp
> Index first = 0; // first element index
> var last = ^1;   // last element index
> var past = ^0;   // past-end index
> ```
>
> *end example*

The method `GetOffset` converts from an abstract `Index` value to a concrete `int` index value for a sequence of the specified `length`. If the `Index` value, `I`, is from-end this method returns the same value as `length - I.Value`, otherwise it returns the same value as `I.Value`.

> This method does **not** check that the return value is in the valid range of `0` through `length-1` inclusive.

Reviewer: Possibly move this into the previous paragraph?

Author: @jskeet – Just for info my reasoning was it is important, and different to how `Range` behaves, so it should stand out (by being apart). No strong stance either way though.

> *Note:* No checking is specified as the expected use of the result is to index into a sequence with `length` elements, and that indexing operation is expected to perform the appropriate checks. *end note*

> `Index` implements `IEquatable<Index>` and values may be compared for equality. However `Index` values are not ordered and no other comparison operations are provided.

Reviewer: Should we note that two `Index` values can resolve to the same concrete `int` index value when applied to the same countable collection, but still be unequal due to one being from-start and the other being from-end? Maybe it's obvious enough. (Or maybe we just state that equality is based on both the Value and IsFromEnd properties being equal.)

Author: @jskeet – Hmm, its comparing *abstract* indices so it *should* be obvious… but if you’d like to craft a *Note* I see no harm. Or I could spell it out as you suggest. Another one for the meeting.

> var wholeSeq = new Range(0, ^0);  // the indices from `0` to `N-1` where `N` is the
>                                   // length of the sequence wholeSeq is used with
> var dropFirst = new Range(1, ^0); // the indices from `1` to `N-1`
> var dropLast = new Range(0, ^1);  // the indices from `0` to `N-2`
> var maybeLast = new Range(^1, 6); // the indices from `N-1` to 5
> var lastTwo = new Range(^2, ^0);  // the indices from `N-2` to `N-1`
> ```
>
> *end example*

The language-defined operator `..` (§range-operator) creates a `Range` value from `Index` values.

> *Example*
>
> Using the `..` the above examples may be written:
>
> ```csharp
> var firstQuad = 0..4;  // the indices from `0` to `3`
> var nextQuad = 4..8;   // the indices from `4` to `7`
> var wholeSeq = 0..^0;  // the indices from `0` to `N-1`
> var dropFirst = 1..^0; // the indices from `1` to `N-1`
> var dropLast = 0..^1;  // the indices from `0` to `N-2`
> var maybeLast = ^1..6; // the indices from `N-1` to 5
> var lastTwo = ^2..^0;  // the indices from `N-2` to `N-1`
> ```
>
> *end example*

The operands of `..` are optional, the first defaults to `0`, the second defaults to `^0`.

> *Example*
>

> > Five of the above examples can also be written:

Reviewer: I'd like a clearer statement of this, but I've failed to wordsmith this. (Effectively I'd like something in this sentence to express the transformation - maybe just "more concisely" or "more concisely using the defaults" would be enough?)

Author: Off the cuff I’ll offer:

> Utilising optional operands five of the above examples can alternatively be written as:

(with any change in spelling of the first word @RexJaeschke recommends)

Author: In the next commit I've written “By replying on optional arguments five…” which avoids having to spell a word wrong ;-)

> # 24 Extended Indexing and Slicing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# 24 Extended indexing and slicing
```

Reviewer: I'm mildly amused that the name of the file doesn't occur anywhere within its title. How much do we care?

Author: @jskeet – The clause title was changed during development and I decided that the file name didn’t need to be, so count me as one who doesn’t care ;-) However I expect the automatic renumbering tool would handle a file name change if folk would prefer it changed – though I might leave that to @BillWagner after the PR is merged.

Author: Capitalisation change will be in next commit

Reviewer 3: It is bugging me a bit. How hard would it be to change later if we think better of it?

## 24.1 General

This clause introduces a model for *extended indexable* and *sliceable* *collection* types built on:

- The types introduced in this clause, `System.Index` (§24.2) and `System.Range` (§24.3);
- The pre-defined unary `^` (§hat-operator) and binary `..` (§range-operator) operators; and
- The *element_access* expression.

Under the model a type is classified as:

- a *collection* if it represents a group of *element*s
- an *extended indexable* collection if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Index` which returns and/or sets a single element of the type, either by value or by reference; and
- an *extended sliceable* collection if it supports an *element_access* expression which has a single argument expression of type `Range` which returns a *slice* of the elements of the type by value.

> *Note*: The model does not require that a slice, unlike an element, of the type can be set, but a type may support it as an extension of the model. *end note*

> The model is supported for single-dimensional arrays (§12.8.12.2) and strings (§string-access).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The model is supported for single-dimensional arrays ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access)) and strings (§string-access).
```

> The model can be supported by any class, struct or interface type which provides appropriate indexers (§15.9) which implement the model semantics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The model can be supported by any class, struct or interface type which provides appropriate indexers ([§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers)) which implement the model semantics.
```

Implicit support for the model is provided for types which do not directly support it but which provide a certain *pattern* of members (§24.4). This support is pattern-based, rather than semantic-based, as the semantics of the type members upon which it is based are *assumed* – the language does not enforce, or check, the semantics of these type members.

For the purposes of this clause the following terms are defined:

- A ***collection*** is a type which represents a group of ***element***s.

> - A ***countable collection*** is one which provides a ***countable property*** an `int` valued instance property whose value is the number of elements currently in the group. This property shall be named either `Length` or `Count`, the former is chosen if both exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A ***countable collection*** is one which provides a ***countable property***: an `int`-valued instance property whose value is the number of elements currently in the group. This property shall be named either `Length` or `Count`. The former is chosen if both exist.
```

- A ***sequence*** or ***indexable type*** is a collection:
  - which is countable;
  - where every element can be accessed using an *element_access* expression with a single required `int` argument, the ***from-start index***, additional optional arguments are allowed;
  - a sequence is ***modifiable*** if every element can also be set using an *element_access* expression;
  - an element’s from-start index is the number of elements before it in the sequence, for a sequence containing *N* elements:
    - the first and last elements have indices of 0 and *N*-1 respectively, and
    - the ***past-end index***, an index which represents a hypothetical element after the last one, has the value *N*.

> - A ***from-end index*** represents an element’s position within a sequence relative to the last element. For a sequence containing *N* elements the first, last and past-end indices are *N*, 1 and 0 respectively.

Reviewer 3: `^1` refers to the last element, so the `1` is not a position relative to the last element.
```suggestion
- A ***from-end index*** represents an element’s position within a sequence relative to the past-end index. For a sequence containing *N* elements the first, last and past-end indices are *N*, 1 and 0 respectively.
```

Reviewer: Agreed

Whether a type is classified as countable, indexable, or sliceable is subject to the constraints of member accessibility (§7.5) and therefore dependent on where the type is being used.

> *Example*: A type where the countable property and/or the indexer are `protected` is only a sequence to members of itself and any derived types. *end example*

The required members for a type to qualify as a sequence or sliceable may be inherited.

> *Example*: In the following code
>
> ```csharp
> public class A
> {
>     public int Length { get { … } }
> }
>
> public class B : A
> {
>     public int this(int index) { … }
> }
>
> public class C : B
> {
>     public int[] Slice(int index, int count) { … }
> }
> ```
>
> The type `A` is countable, `B` is a sequence, and `C` is sliceable and a sequence.
>
> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Note*:
>
> - A type can be sliceable without being indexable due to the lack of an (accessible) indexer.
> - For a type to be sliceable and/or indexable requires the type to be countable.

> > - While the elements of a sequence are ordered by *position* within the sequence the elements themselves need not be ordered by their value, or even orderable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - While the elements of a sequence are ordered by *position* within the sequence, the elements themselves need not be ordered by their value, or even orderable.
```

>
> *end note*

> ## 24.2 The Index type

Reviewer 4: We should discuss these two sections.  

It's great work, but we have steadfastly avoided defining the semantics for library types. I see your point, but I'm concerned about increasing our workload when we are almost 6 releases behind.

Reviewer: Personally I'm okay with defining the semantics of just Index and Range themselves, but not the semantics of how they're used.

Is the workload concern in terms of ongoing maintenance beyond the initial definition that has already been provided?

(No need to respond here - let's definitely discuss in the meeting.)

Author: I will argue we have no choice – the Standard needs to include the semantics either directly or by reference to another Standard, anything else makes the Standard incomplete. So we can discuss how we describe the semantics, have a goal of incrementally adding the semantics for the current contents of §C.3, require all new additions to §C.3 to come with semantics, etc. but we cannot say “semantics will not be provided”. C’est la vie.

Author: Meeting decided to keep the semantics as is, and will monitor – added #1400

This method does **not** check that the return value is in the valid range of `0` through `length-1` inclusive.

> *Note:* No checking is specified as the expected use of the result is to index into a sequence with `length` elements, and that indexing operation is expected to perform the appropriate checks. *end note*

`Index` implements `IEquatable<Index>` and values may be compared for equality based on the abstract value; two `Index` values are equal if and only if the respective `Value` and `IsFromEnd` properties are equal. However `Index` values are not ordered and no other comparison operations are provided.

> *Note:* `Index` values are unordered as they are abstract indices, it is in general impossible to determine whether a from-end index comes before or after a from start index without reference to a sequence length. Once converted to concrete indices, e.g. by `GetOffset`, those concrete indices are comparable. *end note*

> `Index` values may be directly used in the *argument_list* of an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) which is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Index` values may be directly used in the *argument_list* of an *element_access* expression ([§12.8.12](expressions.md#12812-element-access)) which is:
```

> - an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array (§12.8.12.2);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access));
```

- a string access (§string-access)

> - an indexer access and the target type has an indexer with corresponding parameters of either `Index` type (§12.8.12.3) or of a type to which `Index` values are implicitly convertible; or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an indexer access and the target type has an indexer with corresponding parameters of either `Index` type ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) or of a type to which `Index` values are implicitly convertible; or
```

> var (ix0, len0) = firstQuad.GetOffsetAndLength(6); // ix0 = 0, len0 = 4
> var (ix1, len1) = nextQuad.GetOffsetAndLength(6);  // throws ArgumentOutOfRangeException
>                                                    // as range crosses sequence end
> var (ix2, len2) = wholeSeq.GetOffsetAndLength(6);  // ix2 = 0, len2 = 6
> var (ix3, len3) = dropFirst.GetOffsetAndLength(6); // ix3 = 1, len3 = 5
> var (ix4, len4) = dropLast.GetOffsetAndLength(6);  // ix4 = 0, len4 = 5
> var (ix5, len5) = maybeLast.GetOffsetAndLength(6); // ix5 = 5, len5 = 1
> var (ix6, len6) = lastTwo.GetOffsetAndLength(6);   // ix6 = 4, len6 = 2
> ```

`Range` implements `IEquatable<Range>` and values may be compared for equality based on the abstract value; two `Range` values are equal if and only if the abstract values of the respective `Start` and `End` properties are equal (§24.2). However `Range` values are not ordered and no other comparison operations are provided.

> *Note:* `Range` values are unordered both as they are abstract and there is no unique ordering relation. Once converted to a concrete start and length, e.g. by `GetOffsetAndLength`, an ordering relation could be defined. *end note*

> `Range` values can be directly used in the *argument_list* of an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) which is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Range` values can be directly used in the *argument_list* of an *element_access* expression ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access)) which is:
```

> - an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array (§12.8.12.2);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an array access and the target is a single-dimensional array ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access));
```

- a string access (§string-access);

> - an indexer access and the target type has an indexer with corresponding parameters of either `Range` type (§12.8.12.3) or of a type to which `Range` values are implicitly convertible; or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an indexer access and the target type has an indexer with corresponding parameters of either `Range` type ([§??](???)) or of a type to which `Range` values are implicitly convertible; or
```

> - an indexer access (§12.8.12.3) and the target type conforms to a sequence pattern for which implicit `Range` support is specified (§24.4.3).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an indexer access ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) and the target type conforms to a sequence pattern for which implicit `Range` support is specified (§24.4.3).
```

## 24.4 Pattern-based implicit support for Index and Range

### 24.4.1 General

> If an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible to `Index` or `Range`; fails to be identified as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an *element_access* expression ([§12.8.12](expressions.md#12812-element-access)) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible to `Index` or `Range`; fails to be identified as:
```

> - an array access (§12.8.12.2),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an array access ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access)),
```

- a string access (§string-access), or

> - an indexer access (§12.8.12.3) as `T` provides no suitable accessible indexer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an indexer access ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) as `T` provides no suitable accessible indexer
```

then implicit support for the expression is provided if `T` conforms to a particular pattern. If `T` does not conform to this pattern then a compile-time error occurs.

### 24.4.2 Implicit Index support

If in any context an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible to `Index`; is not valid (§24.4.1) then if in the same context:

- `T` provides accessible members qualifying it as a *sequence* (§24.1); and

> - the expression `E[0]` is valid and uses the same indexer that qualifies `T` as a sequence

Reviewer 3: How does this second point place any further constraint beside the first point? To qualify as a sequence, the General section already specifies "where every element can be accessed using an element_access expression with a single required int argument."

Author: @jnm2 – See [this thread](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/1369/files?show-viewed-files=true#r2207229984) below. Does that answer your question?

Reviewer 3: It doesn't answer my question. It looks to me as though "`T` provides accessible members qualifying it as a *sequence* (§24.1)" already requires the int indexer. `E[0]` will always call that required indexer because `int` is the preferred type for `0` when available, so I don't see how the second point is bringing an additional requirement that the first point doesn't already fully specify.

Author: @jnm2 – The definition of sequence requires an accessible indexer but it specifies nothing about the accessors that the indexer has – it could have one or two and they could have different accessibility.

Line 282 discusses `E[A]` in *some* context, that includes being read or written, and ends “if in the same context:”

Line 285 discusses `E[0]` being valid in that same context, so we are matching what is accessible from, and read/write need, of `E[A]`.

If and only if `E[0]` is valid then `E[A]` will be supported.

Now consider the outline (no accessibility for simplicity):

```csharp
class B
{
   int this[int ix] { set; }
   int Count;
}

class D : B
{
   byte this[byte ix] { get; }
   int Length;
}
```

`D` is a sequence based off `D`’s `Length` & `B`’s indexer

Now consider:

```csharp
D d;
Index ix;
int v = d[ix];
```

This is invalid. `d[0]` will select `D`’s indexer, which is readable, but it is not the indexer qualifying `D` as a sequence so `d[ix]` is not supported.

Should definitions such as *sequence* cover read/write? Maybe but they (currently?) do not, and they are (currently?) not unique in this…

All good?

Reviewer 5: Do you mean `class D : B`?  If not, I don't see how "`D` is a sequence based off `D`’s Length & `B`’s indexer".

Author: @KalleOlaviNiemitalo – Oops, thanks. Edited the comment directly.

Reviewer 3: Ah, thank you. I was overlooking inheritance in this incorrect assumption: "E[0] will always call that required indexer because int is the preferred type for 0 when available"

then the expression `E[A]` shall be implicitly supported.

Without otherwise constraining implementations of this Standard the order of evaluation of the expression shall be equivalent to:

1. `E` is evaluated;
2. `A` is evaluated;
3. the countable property of `T` is evaluated, if required by the implementation;

> 4. the get or set accessor of the `int` based indexer of `T` that would be used by `E[0]` in the same context is invoked.

Reviewer 3: Should this say something about how from-end indexes are evaluated against the countable property to obtain an `int` to pass to the indexer? Same question for slicing below.

Author: Details of the calculations are intentionally omitted, note that the countable property need not even be evaluated. The Standard just defines the semantics.

### 24.4.3 Implicit Range support

> If in any context an *element_access* expression (§12.8.12) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible to `Range`; is not valid (§24.4.1) then if in the same context:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If in any context an *element_access* expression ([§12.8.12](expressions.md#12812-element-access)) of the form `E[A]`; where `E` has type `T` and `A` is a single expression implicitly convertible to `Range`; is not valid (§24.4.1) then if in the same context:
```
